{| class="wikitable" style="width: 100%; text-align: center;"
|-
| [[Community Mod Framework]] || [[Community Mod Menu]] || '''Community Mod Toolkit'''
|}
{{Modding tool
|type=Mod Development Toolkit
|logo=CMT_Logo.png
|author=Conner
|status=Released
|github=Europa-Universalis-5-Modding-Co-op/community-mod-toolkit
|nocat=true
}}

= Overview =
The Community Mod Toolkit (CMT) is a companion to the [[Community Mod Framework]] that provides a structured mod template and a set of integrated development tools for EU5 mod authors. It automates common tasks like Steam Workshop uploads, multi-language localization, and mod menu creation.

The tools share a common configuration (<code>tools/config.toml</code>) and project structure, so you can set up once and use any combination of them.

CMT is available on [https://github.com/Europa-Universalis-5-Modding-Co-op/community-mod-toolkit GitHub]. For full documentation, see the [https://github.com/Europa-Universalis-5-Modding-Co-op/community-mod-toolkit/wiki GitHub wiki].

= Setup =
From the root of your mod's Git repository:
<syntaxhighlight lang="bash">
curl.exe -sL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Europa-Universalis-5-Modding-Co-op/community-mod-toolkit/toolkit-release/tools/setup.py -o setup.py
python setup.py
</syntaxhighlight>

This copies all toolkit files into your mod folder, installs Python dependencies, and adds the toolkit as a Git remote for easy updating. The script will not overwrite existing files.

To update the toolkit later:
<syntaxhighlight lang="bash">
git fetch community-mod-toolkit
git merge community-mod-toolkit/toolkit-release --allow-unrelated-histories
</syntaxhighlight>

= Mod Template =
The toolkit includes a complete mod template with starter files for metadata, thumbnails (including PSD source templates), localization, Steam Workshop page (BBCode), editor/git configuration for EU5 conventions, an example submod, and a GitHub README template.

See the [https://github.com/Europa-Universalis-5-Modding-Co-op/community-mod-toolkit/wiki/Mod-Template Mod Template] wiki page for details on each file.

= Upload Tool =
<code>upload.py</code> builds a minimal release folder (stripping tooling, git files, and development artifacts) and uploads it to the Steam Workshop. It can also upload Workshop page titles and descriptions.

<syntaxhighlight lang="bash">
python tools/upload.py                     # upload using config defaults
python tools/upload.py --mod               # upload mod content only
python tools/upload.py --workshop-pages    # upload workshop pages only
python tools/upload.py --dev               # upload to dev Workshop item
python tools/upload.py --submods           # upload all submods
</syntaxhighlight>

{| class="wikitable"
! Feature !! Description
|-
| Dev/Release separation || Separate Workshop items, names, and thumbnails for development and release versions
|-
| Workshop pages || Upload translated titles and descriptions to Steam Workshop language pages
|-
| Submods || Upload independent sub-mods from <code>submods/</code> with their own metadata and Workshop items
|-
| Version gating || Optionally only upload when the <code>metadata.json</code> version has changed
|-
| Auto-creation || Set Workshop item ID to <code>0</code> to create a new item on first upload
|}

Steam must be running for uploads to work.

= Translation Tool =
<code>translate.py</code> auto-translates localization files and Steam Workshop page titles/descriptions using DeepL or Gemini into all EU5-supported languages.

<syntaxhighlight lang="bash">
python tools/translate.py              # translate main mod
python tools/translate.py --submods    # translate main mod + all submods
</syntaxhighlight>

Requires API keys in a <code>.env</code> file (copy from <code>.env-template</code>):
<syntaxhighlight lang="text">
DEEPL_API_KEY=your_key_here
GEMINI_API_KEY=your_key_here
</syntaxhighlight>

== Localization Tags ==
{| class="wikitable"
! Tag !! Effect
|-
| <code># NO-TRANSLATE</code> || Skip a single line
|-
| <code># NO-TRANSLATE BELOW</code> || Skip this line and everything below until the end marker
|-
| <code># NO-TRANSLATE END</code> || End a <code>NO-TRANSLATE BELOW</code> block
|-
| <code># LOCK</code> || Prevent overwriting a translated output line
|}

EU5 markup tags (<code>[...]</code>, <code>$...$</code>, <code>@...!</code>, <code>#...#!</code>) are preserved automatically during translation.

== Caching ==
Only changed content is re-translated. Translation hashes are stored in <code>tools/dependencies/.translate_hashes.json</code>. Delete this file to force a full re-translation.

= CMM Visual Editor =
A browser-based visual editor for creating [[Community Mod Menu]] settings without writing code. It generates all necessary Paradox script and localization files automatically.

<syntaxhighlight lang="powershell">
tools\cmm-visual-editor.bat
tools\cmm-visual-editor.bat --update      # force reinstall latest version
tools\cmm-visual-editor.bat --dev         # use dev branch
</syntaxhighlight>

The launcher automatically installs Python and pipx if needed. See the [[Community Mod Menu|CMM page]] for full documentation on available setting types.

= Configuration =
<code>tools/config.toml</code> is the shared configuration file for all tools. Key settings:

{| class="wikitable"
! Key !! Default !! Description
|-
| <code>source_language</code> || <code>"english"</code> || Source language for translations
|-
| <code>localization_translator</code> || <code>"deepl"</code> || API for localization (<code>deepl</code> or <code>gemini-3-flash</code>)
|-
| <code>translate_workshop</code> || <code>true</code> || Auto-translate workshop title/description
|-
| <code>workshop_upload_item_id</code> || <code>0</code> || Workshop item ID (<code>0</code> creates a new item)
|-
| <code>upload_mod_by_default</code> || <code>true</code> || Upload mod files by default
|-
| <code>upload_workshop_pages_by_default</code> || <code>true</code> || Upload workshop pages by default
|-
| <code>upload_only_on_version_change</code> || <code>false</code> || Only upload when version changes
|}

See the [https://github.com/Europa-Universalis-5-Modding-Co-op/community-mod-toolkit/wiki/Configuration Configuration] wiki page for the full reference.

= Links =
* [https://github.com/Europa-Universalis-5-Modding-Co-op/community-mod-toolkit GitHub Repository]
* [https://github.com/Europa-Universalis-5-Modding-Co-op/community-mod-toolkit/wiki Full Documentation (GitHub Wiki)]
* [https://github.com/Europa-Universalis-5-Modding-Co-op/community-mod-framework Community Mod Framework (GitHub)]

{{Modding navbox
|category=Community Mod Framework
}}
